Added GSoC estefania's report blog post (#195)
MDAnalysis/MDAnalysis.github.io: _posts/2021-09-02-gsoc-final-report-estefania.md

---
layout: post
title: "GSoC Report: Curvature for MDA Universes"
---

The main goal of my [GSoC project](https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/projects/#5098282306502656)
was to develop a tool to calculate membrane curvature
from MD simulations using [MDAnalysis]. We
aimed to have the following features in the membrane curvature analysis tool:

- Surfaces derived from an `AtomGroup` of reference.
- Calculation of mean and Gaussian curvature.
- Implement multiframe and averaged-over-frames analysis.
- Plug-and-play with visualization libraries to obtain 2D curvature profiles.
- Data visualization made easy.

<img

> src="https://ojeda-e.github.io/assets/images/patches.png"

Reviewer: add the image to [public/images](https://github.com/MDAnalysis/MDAnalysis.github.io/tree/master/public/images) (you can also make a subdirectory) please — better to have images locally hosted

Reviewer: Then see https://github.com/MDAnalysis/MDAnalysis.github.io#images

Reviewer: Given that you have multiple images, make a subdirectory, please!

alt="membrane_patches" />

# Why Membrane Curvature?

In the wide range of tools that are available to analyze Molecular Dynamics (MD)
simulations, user-friendly, actively-maintained, and well-documented tools to
calculate membrane curvature are still difficult to find. I was motivated to
share a tool to calculate membrane curvature that I initially developed as part
of my PhD at the [Biocomputing Group](https://ucalgary.ca/biocomputing/home).
Membrane curvature is a phenomenon that can be investigated via MD simulations, and
I had an interest to share this tool with the wider MD community. 

# Contributions
Keeping in mind the goals and motivations behind my GSoC project,
I would like to hightlight three areas of contributions that were key to the
MembraneCurvature MDAnalysis tool: [Core functions](#core-functions-34-40-44),
[AnalysisBase](#analysis-base-43-48), and [Documentation](#documentation-57-62-64-69).

> ## Core functions ([#34], [#40], [#44])

Reviewer: Did you test that `[#34]` resolves as a link? Maybe `[#34][]` does the job?

Author: Hmmm... I tested all the PR links, indeed. It is slow but links accordingly.

The initial version of the code ([#9]) contained functions to map elements from the `AtomGroup` 
of reference into a grid of dimensions defined by the simulation box. [#9] also included the functions to
calculate mean and Gaussian curvature. After refactoring ([#34]), the core functions 
of MembraneCurvature were cleaned and tuned up ([#40] and [#44]). Our core functions are: 

- [`derive_surface`], [`get_z_surface`], [`normalize_grid`] ([#40])

> - [`mean_curvature`], [`gaussian_curvature`]. ([#44])

Reviewer: Instead of linking to PRs, link to your code docs. That will be more interesting for readers.

These functions are our bricks to build the MembraneCurvature AnalysisBase.

## Analysis Base ([#43], [#48])

> The analysis in MembraneCurvature used the [MDAnalysis AnalysisBase](https://docs.mdanalysis.org/1.1.1/documentation_pages/analysis/base.html) building block, from where we obtained the basic structure to run multilframe analysis. 

Reviewer: write this link as 
```suggestion
The analysis in MembraneCurvature used the [MDAnalysis AnalysisBase]({{ site.docs.mdanalysis.url }}/stable/documentation_pages/analysis/base.html) building block, from where we obtained the basic structure to run multilframe analysis. 
```
using site variables from [_config.yml](https://github.com/MDAnalysis/MDAnalysis.github.io/blob/master/_config.yml)

> In the [MembraneCurvature subclass](https://github.com/MDAnalysis/membrane-curvature/blob/4bb851efdeaaeb894b7c354fd019f5f6a97079de/membrane_curvature/base.py#L27) of AnalysisBase,

Reviewer: Also have a link to the docs

`AtomGroup` that may fall outside the boundaries of the grid.

With [#48], we also achieved a significant milestone: reaching [100% code
coverage](https://app.codecov.io/gh/MDAnalysis/membrane-curvature/compare/48/diff#D2)
in MembraneCurvature. 100% coverage means that every line of
code included was executed by [pytest], the test suite used by MDAnalysis, to check that the code works as it
should.

## Documentation ([#57], [#62], [#64], [#69])
One of the strongest motivations to contribute an [MDAnalysis] 
curvature tool was to provide a well-documented package 
to analyze membrane curvature from MD simulations.

The membrane curvature tool includes solid documentation that can be found in
the following pages:

- [API documentation](https://membrane-curvature.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api/membrane_curvature.html) ([#57])
- [Algorithm], [Usage] and [Visualization] pages ([#62])
- [Tutorials] ([#64], [#69])

We included two different tutorials: One where we use Membrane Curvature to
derive surfaces and calculate curvature of a membrane-only system ([#64]), and
another for a membrane-protein system([#69]).

# How can I use it?

> Membrane-curvature uses [MDAnalysis] under the hood. We can install

Reviewer: link to your installation instructions, too

commands, and no long lines of code. With MembraneCurvature you can calculate
curvature in just a few lines of code! The snippet below illustrates how easy it
gets to extract mean and Gaussian curvature from our MD simulations:

```python
import MDAnalysis as mda
from membrane_curvature.base import MembraneCurvature
from membrane_curvature.tests.datafiles import (MEMB_GRO, 
                                                MEMB_XTC)

u = mda.Universe(MEMB_GRO, MEMB_XTC)

mc_upper = MembraneCurvature(u, 
                             select="resid 103-1023 and name PO4",
                             n_x_bins=12, 
                             n_y_bins=12).run()

mc_lower = MembraneCurvature(u, 
                             select='resid 1024-2046 and name PO4', 
                             n_x_bins=12, 
                             n_y_bins=12).run()
```

In the example above, we use two files included in the MembraneCurvature tests:
`MEMB_GRO` and `XTC_GRO`, which comprises a membrane of lipid composition 
<span style="color:#A23333">POPC:POPE</span><span style="color:grey">:CHOL</span>, in a 
<span style="color:#A23333">5:4</span><span style="color:grey">:1</span> ratio:

> <img src="https://ojeda-e.github.io/assets/images/movie_red.gif" width="800" height="400" /> 

Reviewer: local image

We use the selection <span style="color:#92ad6a">`"resid 103-1023 and name PO4"`</span> as an
`AtomGroup` of reference to derive the surface associated to the upper leaflet.
Similarly, we derive the surface from the lower leaflet with the `AtomGroup`
defined by the selection <span style="color:#92ad6a">`"resid 1024-2046 and name PO4"`</span> . In this example,
`PO4` is the name of the phospholipid head groups.

After running MembraneCurvature, the calculated values of the derived surface
(_H_), and Gaussian curvature (_K_) are stored in the `_results()` attribute. We
can easily extract the average results with:

```python
# surface
surf_upper = mc_upper.results.average_z_surface
surf_lower = mc_lower.results.average_z_surface

# mean curvature
mean_upper = mc_upper.results.average_mean
mean_lower = mc_lower.results.average_mean

# Gaussian curvature
gauss_upper = mc_upper.results.average_gaussian
gauss_lower = mc_lower.results.average_gaussian
```

## Plots

> To visualize the results from `MembraneCurvature.run()`, we can use [contourf] from Matplotlib. 

Reviewer: link to docs?

For example, here is the plot of the averaged results for the upper leaflet using contours:

> <img src = "https://ojeda-e.github.io/assets/images/results_dark.png" alt = "results"

Reviewer: local image

is commonly assymetric. With the results obtained from
MembraneCurvature, direct comparison between leaflets can be easily performed. The following snippet generates a
side-by-side plot of the mean curvature results for each leaflet with its respective color bar:

```python
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
from scipy import ndimage
import numpy as np

results = [mean_lower, mean_upper]
leaflets = ["Lower", "Upper"]

fig, [ax1, ax2] = plt.subplots(ncols=2, figsize=(4,3.5))
max_ = np.max(results)

for ax, rs, lf in zip((ax1, ax2), results, leaflets):
    rs = ndimage.zoom(rs, 4, mode='wrap', order=1)
    levs = np.linspace(-max_, max_, 40)
    im = ax.contourf(rs, cmap='bwr', 
                     origin='lower', levels=levs,
                     vmin=-max_, vmax=max_)

    ax.set_aspect('equal')
    ax.set_title('{} Leaflet'.format(lf), fontsize=6)
    ax.axis('off')

cbar = plt.colorbar(im, ticks=[-max_, 0, max_], orientation='vertical', 
                    ax=[ax1, ax2], shrink=0.4, aspect=10, pad=0.05)
cbar.ax.tick_params(labelsize=4, width=0.5)
cbar.set_label('H (nm$^{-1}$)', fontsize=6, labelpad=2) 
```

> <img src = "https://ojeda-e.github.io/assets/images/mycontours_dark.png" 

Reviewer: local image

# In progress
Currently, we are working on implementing interpolation as an option for the
user [#52].

In some situations, when selecting a very high number of bins in the grid, or
when having regions of the grid with low sampling we may find regions of undefined values.
For example, think of a membrane-protein system, where the bins occupied by the protein won't be
populated by lipids, and therefore, will have a region of undefined values in
the grid. Such undefined values spread in the array during the calculation of
curvature, which may result in meaningless output.

By adding an optional interpolation, we will be able to patch up undefined values 
in bins inside the embedded element (i.e. protein). With this improvement, calculation
of membrane curvature won't be hamstrung by the presence of undefined values in the grid.

# What's next?
There is always room for improvement, and MembraneCurvature is not an exception.
One of the main limitations of the current version of MembraneCurvature is the
inability to calculate curvature in systems like vesicles, capsids, or micelles.
This would definitely be a nice improvement for a future release of
MembraneCurvature!

> ![vesicles](https://ojeda-e.github.io/assets/images/vesicles.png)

Reviewer: local image

We acknowledge that scientific research would benefit from a
tool to calculate membrane curvature in these types of systems, so we are
considering possible approaches to include more topologies in MembraneCurvature!

# Acknowledgments
Participating in GSoC with MDAnalysis has been a unique experience. I had the
opportunity to learn best practices in software development mentored by a group
of incredibly talented people:

> - [@lilywang](https://github.com/lilyminium) (Lily),

Reviewer: just use the GH handle and it will automatically resolve, i.e.
```markdown
@lilyminium (Lily), @IAlibay (Irfan), ...
```
and note that Lily's handle is `@lilyminium` !

- [@IAlibay](https://github.com/IAlibay) (Irfan), 
- [@fiona-naughton](https://github.com/fiona-naughton) (Fiona), and
- [@orbeckst](https://github.com/orbeckst) (Oliver). 

I also would like to thank [@richardjgowers](https://github.com/richardjgowers) (Richard) and 

> [@tylerjereddy](https://github.com/tylerjereddy) (Tyler) from the MDA community, who participated in our

Reviewer: same, don't add URLs fior GH handles

[#48]: https://github.com/MDAnalysis/membrane-curvature/pull/48
[#43]: https://github.com/MDAnalysis/membrane-curvature/pull/43
[#44]: https://github.com/MDAnalysis/membrane-curvature/pull/44
[#52]: https://github.com/MDAnalysis/membrane-curvature/pull/52
[#57]: https://github.com/MDAnalysis/membrane-curvature/pull/57
[#62]: https://github.com/MDAnalysis/membrane-curvature/pull/62
[#64]: https://github.com/MDAnalysis/membrane-curvature/pull/64
[#66]: https://github.com/MDAnalysis/membrane-curvature/pull/66
[#69]: https://github.com/MDAnalysis/membrane-curvature/pull/69

[`mean_curvature`]: https://github.com/MDAnalysis/membrane-curvature/blob/4bb851efdeaaeb894b7c354fd019f5f6a97079de/membrane_curvature/curvature.py#L67
[`gaussian_curvature`]: https://github.com/MDAnalysis/membrane-curvature/blob/4bb851efdeaaeb894b7c354fd019f5f6a97079de/membrane_curvature/curvature.py#L39
[`normalize_grid`]: https://github.com/MDAnalysis/membrane-curvature/blob/4bb851efdeaaeb894b7c354fd019f5f6a97079de/membrane_curvature/surface.py#L108
[`get_z_surface`]: https://github.com/MDAnalysis/membrane-curvature/blob/4bb851efdeaaeb894b7c354fd019f5f6a97079de/membrane_curvature/surface.py#L52

> [`derive_surface`]: https://github.com/MDAnalysis/membrane-curvature/blob/4bb851efdeaaeb894b7c354fd019f5f6a97079de/membrane_curvature/surface.py#L22

Reviewer: I'd make these links to your docs and I'd also add parentheses after functions, eg `mean_curvature()`.
